Homage to the Buddha Shakyamuni.
Greetings to all fellow practitioners!
For us Buddhists, filial
piety is extremely important, meaning
showing gratitude to our parents. That's why we
often say, "Parents are two
living Buddhas in the house." Today, a
friend asked about this issue. The
question is as follows: "
Hello, teacher. I know that the Buddha is an
enlightened being, and I've also heard that
parents are two living Buddhas. I
don't quite understand this. Could you please
explain it to me? Thank you, teacher." Dear fellow
practitioners, the friend
wondered, "The Buddha is an enlightened being,
but my parents are not yet
enlightened, so how can they be called
two Buddhas?" This is a
very good question, dear practitioners.
Sometimes we don't wonder like
that because
we simply show filial piety to our
parents, which is
already a form of practice. Therefore, practicing
Buddhism means showing filial piety to our parents. Sometimes
we still say, "Parents are two
living Buddhas in the house."  We're
like that, but we've never been able to
think it through to the very end, to understand it
completely, so that we can
say that with our own understanding.
And this person asked, "The Buddha
is an enlightened being, but parents can be
very ignorant, not just
ordinarily ignorant, so why are they called
two Buddhas in the house?"
When they ask that,
we have to prompt them to question it, right? Do you
find it
very puzzling?
Then, regarding this statement,
we must use Buddhist scriptures to
contemplate it, not with our ordinary human intellect.
I have cited a scripture to answer
this question. In the Miscellaneous Sutras, it is
written: "If someone wants to have
Brahma in their house, they should be filial to their
parents. Brahma is already in their
house." That is, the meaning of the sutra is that if you want Brahma to be in your
house, you
should be filial to your parents, and
Brahma is already in your house. That is, the
merit of being filial to your parents.  If
your mother is like that, you will receive the blessing of
having Brahma's protection,
dear fellow practitioners. Yen continues reading: If you want to have
Indra in your house, be filial to your
parents. Indra is already in your house; that is, if you want the
blessings and
protection of Indra, then be
filial to your parents. The merit of
that will bring you the blessing of
having Indra's protection and blessings.
Please continue reading: If you want
all the celestial beings in your house, just offer alms to your
parents. All the celestial beings will be in your
house. That is, if you want the blessings of all the
celestial beings and gods, or the blessing of
having celestial beings and gods protecting and
supporting you, then be filial to your parents fully,
and you will receive such blessings and protection. That is, being filial to your parents brings blessings like being protected by
Brahma. Being filial to your parents
will bring blessings like Indra's protection and
support. And being filial to your
parents will also bring blessings like having
celestial beings and gods in your house protecting
you. Truly.  You also receive the
protection of the gods and spirits. (Continue reading, Yen)
Until you want to make offerings to the sages and
Buddhas, you only make offerings to your parents. The
sages and Buddhas are all in the house.
This is the answer we need to give to the
other question.
Until you want to make offerings to the sages and
Buddhas, you only make offerings to your parents.
The sages and Buddhas are all in the
house. That means if we want the blessings
of the sages and Buddhas,
we must know how to make offerings to our
parents. The merit of making offerings to the sages
and Buddhas is the same as the merit of serving and making offerings to our parents. We must understand this clearly: we only make offerings to the Buddhas and Sages, just one thing, that is, just
one thing. You can offer them an orange or a handful of rice – just one thing.
But the merit of serving our
parents is much longer, dear fellow practitioners.
It's not just about bringing a
handful of rice to feed your mother and
offering it to her. That's a misunderstanding; it's about the merit of serving and making offerings
to your parents.
Serving one's parents, serving one's parents—that's what,
dear fellow practitioners—is equivalent to making an
offering to the Buddhas
and Saints. Then you will understand
this point clearly. Let me explain clearly to you, dear fellow practitioners: a
person who wants to make an offering to their parents,
like making an
offering to the Buddhas and Saints, will receive the same merit. When we approach the
Buddhas and Saints, we are making an offering
to them. We would
never reach into their alms bowls to
take their food and put it in
our mouths. That is what we call
an offering. Therefore, this child
must never have the thought of taking from their parents,
never have the thought that their parents gave birth to
them and must raise them. They must not have that thought, dear fellow
practitioners. They must not think that
they need to rely on their
parents when they are in difficulty. Only then can it be
called serving one's parents. Furthermore, when parents are
sick or in difficulty, one must
take on all
responsibility with a full filial heart, serving them,
providing for them, nurturing them, and
caring for them.  My mother's offering to my
parents is called offering to the
Buddha and the Saints, and
this is what I, your esteemed fellow practitioners, would call offering to them. Here, I'm also mentioning my own experience
to share with you all.
From a very young age, I was
just a few years old, not even
in school, but deep in
my heart, in
my karma, I had the awareness that I would be the one to
care for my parents. So I'll tell you
a story:
when I was little, my sisters and I were
playing under blankets on the bed,
building houses and doors on the
bed. My mother invited a fortune teller
to examine us, and he said that later,
my mother would rely on her youngest daughter, me, to
build houses and doors on the
bed. Even as a child, I didn't have the awareness that I would be the one to care for my parents. That is, from childhood to adulthood, I didn't have that
awareness. Even so,
I only
recognized the awareness that I would be the
one to care for my parents.  When my mother heard the
fortune teller say that, I realized
that I couldn't accept anyone else
being the one to take care of my parents. Only I could
be the one to care for them. The
fortune teller
said that to my mother at a table far away,
several meters away. Yet, I
was playing with my sisters
on the bed, under the covers, making
playhouses and dancing. But
somehow, his words resonated with me, and I froze. I
felt sad, and that
sadness lingered in
my memory. That saying
became a system of
consciousness for me: I wouldn't accept anyone else
caring for my parents; it had to be
me. From that day the fortune teller
said that, all my responsibilities towards my parents were formed and remained with
me for the rest of my life.
That saying is imprinted in
my heart and has followed me every
step of the way, dear friends.
And it has stayed with me until I was
...  Yen also said that she
only gives to her parents and doesn't accept anything
from them. Parents giving birth to her
is good enough, so she does
n't
take anything from her maternal or paternal parents. Yen has practiced
this principle, not demanding anything from her paternal family,
only hoping to give to them.
In all her
life, Yen has never asked her parents for
anything and always strives to provide for them. When her
parents were
sick, Yen always took
care of them and was responsible for their well-being.
Yen also recounted a
story she heard about ginseng being
very precious for sick parents, and that having ginseng to eat meant a very wealthy
family. Yen's only concern was
how she could provide ginseng for her elderly and sick parents. That was her deepest desire,
and before she started working and was
still a servant in the family, she had always felt this way.
A small piece of ginseng, just
like this, just like
this, a short piece of ginseng root. I don't know where Yen's husband bought it. He brought it home and
gave it to Yen. Yen carefully put it in the
refrigerator door and kept it there, thinking that it
would be for her parents. If anyone
was sick, she would bring the ginseng to her parents to eat. That's why Yen
understood
this saying and scripture of the Buddha: that those who
want to make offerings to the saints and Buddha only
make offerings to their parents. The saints and
Buddha are all in the house. The offering
to parents is a continuous act from childhood
to adulthood, not just something
we can do like giving them a piece of food.
At this moment, dear fellow practitioners, when
our parents are seriously ill, we
know whether our hearts are truly filial or not.
Because I myself am the one who takes care of them. My mother is seriously ill,
always sick, and always smells
foul. When Yen came home,
her father called, "Mother is very sick, my child, come home." He asked, "What's wrong with you, Mother?" He said something
like, "She's been
burned."  Yen thought it was very
simple, just a simple request, nothing too
serious, so she said, "
I'll do my duty for a day or two and then I'll
come home." She thought it was simple, just a
simple request. Then her father
called again, "Mom is very sick, my child."
Hearing her father's voice, she said, "
Come home, my child." It's true
that at home, we have such feelings for our
parents; they only rely on us. Although we have
many siblings, not just a
few,
to reassure our parents, we must
live and care for them
in the way we have always done.
Dear fellow practitioners, Yen also said
that there are times when we have to work every week and
help our mother every week, not
every year or every month. It's not like that. We have to
adapt to what our
parents need at this time and what they need at another time. Dear fellow
practitioners, when
Yen's father called a second time, "Mom is
very sick, my child," his
voice...  At that time,
Yen felt
that she was the only support for
her parents, so she called her sisters to ask for
some medicine
to treat her illness. When Yen brought the
medicine home, she
told herself
that she was the only one who could take care of
her mother because the sores were oozing
pus and emitting a very
foul smell. Yen
also told her father that she would take care of her mother, emphasizing that she had to
take care of her mother.
When her mother and father were seriously ill, it was only then that she
realized whether she still had the
only concept of filial piety.
Dear fellow practitioners, the days were endless, from morning till night, spent treating her mother. She only ate one meal a day, sometimes not until
3 or 4 in the afternoon, constantly dealing with the
foul smell. It
was truly difficult for Yen. When Yen was sick, no
one came to visit because they were afraid of
contagion and the smell. Only Lai, her
father, and her aunt came briefly to the
outer room to look and ask.  Because everyone is
afraid of that terrible illness, Venerable Buddha,
to keep in mind the thought of
offering to
parents as if offering to the Buddha and the saints,
we must have a single, unwavering thought
in all circumstances. Only then can
we compare it to the thought of offering to the
Buddha and the saints. That's why it's said
that
parents are two early Buddhas. If we dedicate our
whole lives to
offering and serving our parents in this way, then
we can be considered to
have offered a little to the Buddhas and saints. With
such a mind, we will
receive the blessings and guidance of the Buddhas and saints. The scriptures
teach that the saints and Buddhas are all
in the home. And Yen also mentioned that her mother was sick, and
Yen had a
dream where she took a mulberry tree from the gable end of the house, boiled
water, chopped it up, and boiled it for her mother.
When Yen woke up, it was true, there were two
mulberry trees at the front of the house, and she boiled water for her mother's bath. The
first and second times, because
each mulberry tree had one branch,
boiled it for two days, and then she recovered.  It's all gone,
not a single trace of you left.
So, is this truly the blessing of the Buddhas and
Saints at home?
Their power has brought about this
miraculous event.
That's within the intention of filial piety and
obedience, dear friends. Therefore, as
truly and genuinely, I still feel that I have
completed the task of saving you. Read
another sutra, the Anguttara Nikaya.
There are two people a
monk can never fully repay: his
father and mother. Even if one carries his father on his left shoulder and his
mother on his right, traveling thousands of miles,
providing them with food, clothing, blankets, and
medicine, even if they urinate or
defecate on his shoulders, it still wouldn't be enough. The
deep debt of gratitude to parents is immense. You must know that the debt of gratitude to
parents is immense; they nurtured and
raised you, bringing you to adulthood.
Therefore, that debt is difficult to repay. A
filial child who wants to repay their parents' kindness
according to the Dharma must practice the
following:
If parents lack faith,
encourage them to develop faith.
If parents follow evil,
we should encourage them to cultivate a charitable spirit. That is, we
must encourage our parents to have
faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha, and we must let our
parents know how to make offerings and give alms.
If parents follow evil, we must
encourage them to turn
towards the path of goodness. Dear fellow practitioners,
after this video, I also want you
to share how you
have guided your parents. There
are two benefits:
Firstly, it brings us
joy with the merits we create. Each
time we rejoice in this filial piety, it
will continue to bring us
joy for many lifetimes and many future lives.
Therefore, we should cultivate these good thoughts abundantly.
Secondly,
we encourage others to
practice filial piety. I urge you,
dear fellow
practitioners, to share about the ways you have
practiced the Buddha's teachings on filial piety.
Here, I
have also shared my experience.  To all the esteemed Dharma friends,
from the beginning, Yen's father didn't know how to make offerings.
Yen said, "Dad, don't burn
gold and money anymore. Just make offerings to the Three
Jewels, 1,000 or 2,000 VND, to dedicate the
merit to our ancestors."
Yen's father replied, "Okay, I'll burn a little too, just a
little, meaning a small amount of gold and money.
Before, I burned a lot, but now it's just a little." Then he said, "
Why only 1,000 or 2,000 VND?
I'll even give 10,000 VND to the
ancestors." So we
encouraged him gradually, and later,
just before his last breath,
he said, "Whatever I have left, I'll give it all away." After saying that, he began to cultivate
Bodhicitta (the aspiration for enlightenment), and he passed away
peacefully. So
we encouraged him
gradually, and later, he himself
stopped burning gold and money because the
merit was generated. He also acquired a
Dharma radio from the temple, and listening to
it gradually resonated with him.  He's a
vegetarian, so he eats vegetarian food. Then,
several times when I came home, I saw he had meat.
He said, "Okay, I'll
just buy a little bit occasionally, I'm not killing any animals anymore."
That's very good, dear fellow practitioners.
Yen continued reading. That is, if parents do evil,
encourage them to turn towards
good, meaning to stop killing animals,
and to listen to the Dharma and cultivate Bodhicitta.
Yen continued reading. If parents follow wrong views, they
must be encouraged to return to right views.
With right views of
liberation, initially, the elderly often
have the concept that death is the end, that
death is the end, that death is going to the eternal realm. That means they've
fallen into wrong views.
But now they know that death is subject to the
cycle of
rebirth in the six realms and they must practice to escape the cycle of birth and death. That means
having right views and cultivating Bodhicitta.
Doing so is repaying parents
according to the true Dharma, making them not
only happy in the present but also
sowing blessings in the future. Dear fellow
practitioners,
we
want to consider our parents as two living Buddhas
in our
home.  We must perform all
those meritorious deeds, but this merit is
not about our parents being two living Buddhas.
It only corresponds to the saying: offering and
supporting our parents.
That merit is equivalent to the merit of offering to the
Buddhas and Saints just once, dear fellow
practitioners. Throughout our lives, we filial piety towards our
parents, along with guiding them into the
true Dharma of the Buddha. The blessings
we receive are only equal to the blessings of
offering to the Buddhas and
Saints just once. And
more importantly, we will receive the
blessings and support of the Buddhas and Saints,
helping us to cultivate ourselves, dear fellow practitioners.
Therefore, the
practice of virtuous conduct is essential and
indispensable for a Buddhist follower.
So, we must understand the meaning of the saying "parents
are two living Buddhas":
if we serve our parents fully, as described
in the two passages of the Sutra above, then
we will have the merit of offering to the
Buddhas in this life, dear fellow
practitioners. May
you all strive diligently.  Of course, in this matter,
many
people in this life have been
unfilial, demanding things from
their parents, perhaps
material things, and causing their parents
sorrow and suffering. It could
also be daughters who, after getting
married, sometimes
prioritize their husbands over their parents for the sake of their own lives, or sons who
fear their wives or value their wives and children more than
their parents. If we commit such unfilial acts,
we should repent and try to
bring our parents into the ocean of Buddhist teachings. In doing
so, we repay our parents' kindness.
However, we should not say that this is
enough
to consider it an offering to the
Buddha. The
merit of offering to the Buddha is immeasurable and
boundless. Therefore, even a single thought of filial piety and
caring for one's parents
must be cultivated through
many lifetimes of practice and cultivation of filial piety.
May you all strive diligently. Namo Buddha
Shakyamuni
[music]
[Applause]
[Music]